**Table of contents**
- [AL Tutorial Series Part 5 Installing a 2-tier Certificate Authority (PKI) hierarchy using AutomatedLab](#al-tutorial-series-part-5-installing-a-2-tier-certificate-authority-(pki)-hierarchy-using-automatedlab)
    - [Summary](#summary)
    - [Installation](#installation)
    - [Prerequisites for AutomatedLab](#prerequisites-for-automatedlab)
    - [Prerequisites for installing the two CA servers in the lab](#prerequisites-for-installing-the-two-ca-servers-in-the-lab)
    - [Defining the lab machines](#defining-the-lab-machines)
        - [Customizing the configuration of the CA servers](#customizing-the-configuration-of-the-ca-servers)
    - [Supported PKI configurations in AutomatedLab](#supported-pki-configurations-in-automatedlab)
    - [What is next](#what -is-next)
    - [The Full Script](#the-full-script)

AL Tutorial Series Part 5 Installing a 2-tier Certificate Authority (PKI) hierarchy using AutomatedLab
========================================================================================================

Summary
-------

Following up on the first article “Installing a simple Certificate
Authority (PKI) using AutomatedLab”, this article will show how to
deploy a PKI environment as it would be typically deployed in a
production environment. This time, the PKI environment will be deployed
using two separate servers. One server will be a Root CA (Certificate
Authority) server and the other will be a Subordinate CA server. The
Root CA will be in a workgroup and the Subordinate CA will be in a
domain. Subsequently, you will then be able to request and issue
certificates from the Subordinate CA server to all computers and users
in your lab. Also, if you want to be able to sign PowerShell scripts in
the lab, a certificate can be created for this purpose.

The home, and where to get **AutomatedLab** is:
<https://automatedlab.codeplex.com/>

Installation
------------

If you have a pre-2.5 version of AutomatedLab installed, please
uninstall it and install the latest version from
<http://automatedlab.codeplex.com/>.

The installation process of AutomatedLab is covered in the article
[AutomatedLab Introduction - Part
2](http://blogs.technet.com/b/fieldcoding/archive/2014/07/27/automatedlab-introduction-part-2.aspx).

Prerequisites for AutomatedLab
------------------------------

AutomatedLab requires **Hyper-V** and **PowerShell 3.0** (or higher).
Hence, you need one of the following operating systems on the host where
you want to install the lab:

-   Windows Server 2012/2012R2

-   Windows 8

-   Windows 8.1

Although Windows Server 2008 R2 could work and Windows 10 hasn’t been
tested, it is recommended at this point to use Windows Server
2012/2012R2 or Windows 8/8.1 on the host machine.

AutomatedLab scripts needs to be executing directly on the host where
the lab environment (the VMs) will be installed/created.

For more information about the overall installation process, refer to
the previous articles.

Prerequisites for installing the two CA servers in the lab
----------------------------------------------------------

There are really no prerequisites other than the servers where the
certificate authority roles will be installed on, need to be at least
Windows Server 2012.

Defining the lab machines
-------------------------

First, for the Subordinate server, a domain is needed. Hence, a domain
controller needs to be installed. The installation part of this, will is
the same as in the first article.

The domain and the domain controller is defined like this:

\$role = Get-LabMachineRoleDefinition -Role RootDC \`

-Properties @{DomainFunctionalLevel = "Win2012R2"

ForestFunctionalLevel = "Win2012R2"}

Add-LabMachineDefinition -Name S1DC1 \`

-MemoryInMb 512 \`

-Network \$labNetworkName \`

-IpAddress 192.168.81.10 \`

-DnsServer1 192.168.81.10 \`

-DomainName test1.net \`

-IsDomainJoined \`

-Roles \$role \`

-InstallationUserCredential \$installationCredential \`

-ToolsPath \$labSources\\Tools \`

-OperatingSystem 'Windows Server 2012 R2 Datacenter (Server with a GUI)'

Then, the Root CA need to be installed. This server will be a
Stand-Alone CA server and not joined to any domain. Since the
Certificate Authority (like domain controller) is a **role** in
AutomatedLab, this **role** needs to be specified when defining the lab
machine. The role is selected using the cmdlet
**Get-LabMachineRoleDefinition** like this:

\$role = Get-LabMachineRoleDefinition -Role CaRoot

Next, the lab machine can defined using the selected role.

Add-LabMachineDefinition -Name S1ROOTCA1 \`

-MemoryInMb 512 \`

-Network \$labNetworkName \`

-IpAddress 192.168.81.11 \`

-DnsServer1 192.168.81.10 \`

-DomainName test1.net \`

-IsDomainJoined \`

-Roles \$role \`

-InstallationUserCredential \$installationCredential \`

-ToolsPath \$labSources\\Tools \`

-OperatingSystem 'Windows Server 2012 R2 Datacenter (Server with a GUI)'

Next, the Subordinate CA server needs to be defined. This is the code
for doing this:

\$role = Get-LabMachineRoleDefinition -Role CaSubordinate

Next, the lab machine can defined using the selected role. This command
is the same as for defining the Root CA. Only the contents of the \$role
variable is different.

Add-LabMachineDefinition -Name S2SUBCA1 \`

-MemoryInMb 512 \`

-Network \$labNetworkName \`

-IpAddress 192.168.81.12 \`

-DnsServer1 192.168.81.10 \`

-DomainName test1.net \`

-IsDomainJoined \`

-Roles \$role \`

-InstallationUserCredential \$installationCredential \`

-ToolsPath \$labSources\\Tools \`

-OperatingSystem 'Windows Server 2012 R2 Datacenter (Server with a GUI)'

Now when all the machines have been defined, start the installation of
the lab like usual. This would mean, export the lab definition, import
it (which also validates the configuration and reports any errors) and
finally start the actual installation which will create virtual network,
create base images, create Hyper-V VMs and install the roles found in
the lab.

The code for this, looks like this:

Export-LabDefinition -Force -ExportDefaultUnattendedXml

Import-Lab -Path (Get-LabDefinition).LabFilePath

Install-Lab -NetworkSwitches -BaseImages -VMs

Install-Lab -Domains

At this point, the Domain Controller is installed and ready. Now the
installation of the Certificate Authority needs to be started. This is
done like this:

Install-Lab -CA

Notice that you do not need to instruct the cmdlet **Install-Lab** about
*how* to install the CA servers and how they should be configured. This
will done automatically.

Now, the lab is ready with a domain controller (hosting a domain of
course) and with two Enterprise CA servers. Now, you can request and
issue certificates (from the Subordinate CA) for use in your lab!

### Customizing the configuration of the CA servers

The first install was very easy as all configuration of the Root CA and
the Subordinate CA is automatically done when plainly calling
**Install-Lab -CA.** Now, let’s try installing a PKI environment where
we define some of the configuration of the CA ourselves. Even though the
default installation will work in the far majority of situations for a
test lab, it could be necessary to specify certain parts of the
configuration for the PKI environment.

First of all, the current lab needs to be removed. Do this by calling

Remove-Lab -Path &lt;path to the **lab.xml** file&gt;

The cmdlet **Remove-Lab** (turns off and) removes the VMs, the disks and
finally the network adapter.

First off, the domain and the domain controller needs to be defined as
before.

\$role = Get-LabMachineRoleDefinition -Role RootDC \`

> -Properties @{DomainFunctionalLevel = "Win2012R2"
>
> ForestFunctionalLevel = "Win2012R2"}

Add-LabMachineDefinition -Name S1DC1 \`

-MemoryInMb 512 \`

-Network \$labNetworkName \`

-IpAddress 192.168.81.10 \`

-DnsServer1 192.168.81.10 \`

-DomainName test1.net \`

-IsDomainJoined \`

-Roles \$role \`

-InstallationUserCredential \$installationCredential \`

-ToolsPath \$labSources\\Tools \`

-OperatingSystem 'Windows Server 2012 R2 Datacenter (Server with a GUI)'

Now, when defining the role of the CA, we have the option of specifying
configuration parameters. Take a look at the following:

\$role = Get-LabMachineRoleDefinition \`

-Role CaRoot @{CACommonName = "MySpecialRootCA1"

KeyLength = “4096”

ValidityPeriod = "Year"

ValidityPeriodUnits "20"}

Next, the lab machine can defined using the selected role with the
customized configuration.

Add-LabMachineDefinition -Name S1ROOTCA1 -MemoryInMb 512 \`

-Network \$labNetworkName \`

-IpAddress 192.168.81.11 \`

-DnsServer1 192.168.81.10 \`

-DomainName test1.net \`

-IsDomainJoined \`

-Roles \$role \`

-InstallationUserCredential \$installationCredential \`

-ToolsPath \$labSources\\Tools \`

-OperatingSystem 'Windows Server 2012 R2 Datacenter (Server with a GUI)'

Last, the machine for Subordinate CA needs to be defined. This command
is the same as before. Only the contents of the \$role variable is
different.

Take a look at the following:

\$role = Get-LabMachineRoleDefinition \`

-Role CaRoot @{CACommonName = "MySpecialRootCA1"

KeyLength = “4096”

ValidityPeriod = "Year"

ValidityPeriodUnits "20"}

For actually adding (defining) the machine, type the following command.
This command is the same as for defining the Root CA. Only the contents
of the \$role variable is different.

Add-LabMachineDefinition -Name S1SUBCA1 -MemoryInMb 512 \`

-Network \$labNetworkName \`

-IpAddress 192.168.81.11 \`

-DnsServer1 192.168.81.10 \`

-DomainName test1.net \`

-IsDomainJoined \`

-Roles \$role \`

-InstallationUserCredential \$installationCredential \`

-ToolsPath \$labSources\\Tools \`

-OperatingSystem 'Windows Server 2012 R2 Datacenter (Server with a GUI)'

Just as before, perform the actual installation of the lab using:

Export-LabDefinition -Force -ExportDefaultUnattendedXml

Import-Lab -Path (Get-LabDefinition).LabFilePath

Install-Lab -NetworkSwitches -BaseImages -VMs

Install-Lab –Domains

Install-Lab -CA

Also notice that the command for installing the CAs is the same as
previously. Difference is that now the parameters specified in the
**role** parameters will be passed to the CA installation code.

Now, **this time**, the lab is ready with a Domain Controller (hosting a
domain of course) and with a complete 2-tier PKI hierarchy configured
**using our customized parameters**.

To see what parameters is possible to specify when installing a CA
server in AutomatedLab, you can type the following:

Get-Help Install-LWLabCAServers -Parameter \*

Then you will see all possible parameters. To see just the names of the
parameters (without the detailed information), type:

(Get-Command Install-LWLabCAServers).Parameters.Keys

Changing the parameters for the CA servers to be installed, requires you
to know about how the corresponding configuration parameters for CA
servers are working. Hence, it is only recommended to specify/customize
parameters if you know about PKI and thereby have the need to
specify/customize parameters.

Supported PKI configurations in AutomatedLab
--------------------------------------------

AutomatedLab supports 1-tier and 2 tier deployments of PKI. This means
that you can deploy a Root CA solely or you can deploy a Root CA and a
Subordinate CA to this Root CA.

Also, only deployments of PKI in the same AD forest are supported.
Deployment of a Root CA in one AD forest and a Subordinate CA in another
AD forest where this Subordinate CA is subordinate to the first
mentioned Root CA, is not supported.

What is next
------------

The next article discusses how to manage software inside your lab and
how to run custom tasks leveraging the AutomatedLab infrastructure.

The Full Script
---------------

\$start = Get-Date

\#Some definitions about folder paths

\#This folder contains two sub folders

\# -ISOs - Stores all the DVD images

\# -PostInstallationActivities - any scripts to customize the
environment after installation

\$labSources = 'E:\\LabSources'

\$vmDrive = 'D:'

\$labName = 'PKITypical1'

\#this folder stores the XML files that contain all the information
about the lab

\$labPath = "\$vmDrive\\\$labName"

\#create the target directory if it does not exist

if (-not (Test-Path \$labPath)) { New-Item \$labPath -ItemType Directory
| Out-Null }

\#create an empty lab template and define where the lab XML files and
the VMs will be stored

New-LabDefinition -Path \$labPath -VmPath \$labPath -Name \$labName
-ReferenceDiskSizeInGB 60

\#make the network definition

Add-LabVirtualNetworkDefinition -Name \$labName -IpAddress 192.168.81.1
-PrefixLength 24

\#and the domain definition with the domain admin account

Add-LabDomainDefinition -Name test1.net -AdminUser administrator
-AdminPassword Password1

\#these images are used to install the machines

Add-LabIsoImageDefinition -Name Server2012 -Path
\$labSources\\ISOs\\en\_windows\_server\_2012\_r2\_with\_update\_x64\_dvd\_4065220.iso
-IsOperatingSystem

\#these credentials are used for connecting to the machines. As this is
a lab we use clear-text passwords

\$installationCredential = New-Object PSCredential('Administrator',
('Password1' | ConvertTo-SecureString -AsPlainText -Force))

\#the first machine is the root domain controller. Everything in
\$labSources\\Tools get copied to the machine's Windows folder

\$role = Get-LabMachineRoleDefinition -Role RootDC @{
DomainFunctionalLevel = 'Win2012R2'; ForestFunctionalLevel = 'Win2012R2'
}

Add-LabMachineDefinition -Name S1DC1 \`

-MemoryInMb 512 \`

-IsDomainJoined \`

-DomainName test1.net \`

-Network \$labName \`

-IpAddress 192.168.81.10 \`

-DnsServer1 192.168.81.10 \`

-InstallationUserCredential \$installationCredential \`

-ToolsPath \$labSources\\Tools \`

-OperatingSystem 'Windows Server 2012 R2 Datacenter (Server with a GUI)' \`

-Roles \$role

\#the second will be a member server configured as Root CA server.
Everything in \$labSources\\Tools get copied to the machine's Windows
folder

\$role = Get-LabMachineRoleDefinition -Role CaRoot

Add-LabMachineDefinition -Name S1ROOTCA1 \`

-MemoryInMb 512 \`

-Network \$labName \`

-IpAddress 192.168.81.20 \`

-DnsServer1 192.168.81.10 \`

-InstallationUserCredential \$installationCredential \`

-ToolsPath \$labSources\\Tools \`

-OperatingSystem 'Windows Server 2012 R2 Datacenter (Server with a GUI)' \`

-Roles \$role

\#the thrid will be a member server configured as Subordinate CA server.
Everything in \$labSources\\Tools get copied to the machine's Windows
folder

\$role = Get-LabMachineRoleDefinition -Role CaSubordinate

Add-LabMachineDefinition -Name S2SUBCA1 \`

-MemoryInMb 512 \`

-IsDomainJoined \`

-DomainName test1.net \`

-Network \$labName \`

-IpAddress 192.168.81.30 \`

-DnsServer1 192.168.81.10 \`

-InstallationUserCredential \$installationCredential \`

-ToolsPath \$labSources\\Tools \`

-OperatingSystem 'Windows Server 2012 R2 Datacenter (Server with a GUI)' \`

-Roles \$role

\#This all has created the lab configuration in memory. Next step is to
export it to XML. You could have made the

\#lab definitions in XML as well or can do modifications in the XML if
this seems easier.

Export-LabDefinition -Force -ExportDefaultUnattendedXml

\#Set trusted hosts to '\*' and enable CredSSP

Set-LabHostRemoting

\#Now the XML files needed to be reimported. Some basic checks are done
for duplicate IP addresses, machine names, domain

\#membership, etc. If this reports errors please run "Test-LabDefinition
D:\\LabSettings\\Lab.xml" for more information

Import-Lab -Path (Get-LabDefinition).LabFilePath

\#Now the actual work begins. First the virtual network adapter is
created and then the base images per OS

\#All VMs are diffs from the base.

Install-Lab -NetworkSwitches -BaseImages -VMs

\#This sets up all domains / domain controllers

Install-Lab -Domains

\#Install CA server(s)

Install-Lab -CA

\#Start all machines what have not yet started

Install-Lab -StartRemainingMachines

\$end = Get-Date

Write-Host "Setting up the lab took \$(\$end - \$start)"
